Source: consul_io
URL: https://www.consul.io/use-cases/discover-services

Tutorial
Getting started with Consul
Consul can be deployed on any runtime. Get started by deploying your first Consul on a VM and register your first service for discovery.
Use case
Use Consul as a centralized registry that discovers, tracks, and monitors your services. Consul can be your single source of truth for cataloging and maintaining a record of all your services.
Challenge
Traditionally, applications and services tend to be static where IPs remain unchanged. Maintaining service information like IP addresses was manageable with configuration management databases (CMDB). However, this becomes a challenge today where cloud-based applications are much more dynamic and traditional tools struggle to keep up. This is even more evident today with microservices that are ephemeral and constantly changing.
Solution
Rather than depending on legacy tools that require manual updates, developers can use Consul to discover, track, and monitor services. Clients can then query Consul's API and discover service dependencies.
200+
services across multiple Kubernetes clusters
Days > minutes
reduction in time to discover and connect services using Consul
1 billion +
data points coordinated and connected
Tutorial
Consul can be deployed on any runtime. Get started by deploying your first Consul on a VM and register your first service for discovery.
Tutorial
Learn how to install Consul on Kubernetes, then explore service mesh features such as service-to-service permissions with intentions and enhanced observability.
Tutorial
Learn how to configure AWS Lambda functions to interact with Consul service mesh. Replace a Kubernetes service deployment with an AWS Lambda function.
Documentation
One of the main goals of service discovery is to provide a catalog of available services.
Documentation
The DNS interface allows applications to make use of service discovery without any high-touch integration with Consul.
Documentation
One of the primary roles of the agent is management of system-level and application-level health checks.
HashiCorp Co-Founder and CTO Armon Dadgar gives a whiteboard overview of HashiCorp Consul, a service networking solution to connect, configure, and secure services in dynamic infrastructure.