Source: consul_io
URL: https://www.consul.io/

Discover services with DNS or HTTP
Use DNS or an HTTP API to discover registered services and their locations with Consul.
Consul uses service identities and traditional networking practices to help organizations securely connect applications running in any environment.
A modern service networking solution requires that we answer four specific questions: Where are my services running? How do I secure the communication between them? How do I automate routine networking tasks? How do I control access to my environments?
Create a central registry that tracks services, updates, and health statuses in real time.
Ensure all service-to-service communication is authenticated, authorized, and encrypted.
Reduce the operator burden by automating key networking tasks.
Control access to services at the point of entry and centralize traffic management.
HashiCorp Co-Founder and CTO Armon Dadgar gives a whiteboard overview of HashiCorp Consul, a service networking solution to connect, configure, and secure services in dynamic infrastructure.
Use DNS or an HTTP API to discover registered services and their locations with Consul.
Control access to services running within a Consul service mesh with the API Gateway.
Automate manual networking tasks and reduce ticket queues as a bonus.
Provision apps faster. Automate complex networking tasks. Separate concerns so operators can easily manage and optimize networking.
Authenticate with mTLS and encrypt connections between services.
Consul service mesh can deploy in any environment and supports multiple runtimes, including Kubernetes, Nomad, and VMs.
Visualize service mesh topology with Consul’s built-in UI or one of the included APM integrations.
Implement fine-grained traffic policies for routing and splitting traffic across services.
4 tutorials
Speed up time to delivery for services with network infrastructure automation. Automated configuration changes with Consul-Terraform-Sync.
3 tutorials
Ensure complete security for service-to-service access, authorization, and communication by using Consul and Vault.
5 tutorials
Accelerate the application delivery lifecycle with orchestration and scheduling from Nomad and Consul service mesh.
How and why users deploy Consul
Tutorial
Discover and track applications within any environment. Make new services instantly available and avoid outages caused by stale catalogs.
Tutorial
Automate key networking tasks, like updating load balancer member pools or applying firewall policies, using Consul and Terraform.
Tutorial
Know in real time if services are reachable and healthy. Identify any potential outages before they happen.
Tutorial
Ensure that all communication between services is both authorized and encrypted automatically.
Tutorial
Use Consul service mesh to view the flow of requests between services. Implement progressive delivery practices, like canary deployments.
Tutorial
Monitor application performance and identify problem areas at the service level. Gather metrics that can be monitored in the Consul UI.
An inside look at powerful solutions from some of the world’s most innovative companies.
HCP Consul simplifies cloud networking automation on either self-managed or fully managed infrastructure. Get started for free and pay only for what you use.