Source: expanso_io
URL: https://expanso.io/newsroom/author/laura/

[VentureBeat: The end of centralized data? Samsung teams with Expanso on distributed processing](https://expanso.io/newsroom/venturebeat-samsung-next-teams-with-expanso/)
Read the Article on VentureBeat
Read the Article on VentureBeat
Read the article on the Samsung Next blog.
SEATTLE–(BUSINESS WIRE)- Expanso, the distributed compute company based in Seattle, Washington has secured a strategic investment from Samsung Next that signals big ambitions to transform how data is being managed and processed worldwide. Expanso, founded in early 2023 by tech veteran and former Kubernetes Product Lead David Aronchick, announced today that it has closed financing…
We are thrilled to announce the release of Bacalhau 1.2! Following the Bacalhau 1.1 release in September 2023, we’ve explored a variety of innovative and groundbreaking use cases, such as: We are also proud to announce that the U.S. Navy chose Bacalhau to manage predictive maintenance workloads! But that’s just the start – Bacalhau 1.2 is packed with new features,…
With the volume, velocity, and variety of data produced by enterprises growing at 42 percent year over year, the world’s data storage capacity will exceed 175 zettabytes by 2025. Management of that data using traditional methods is expensive, slow, and heavily regulated. Furthermore, much of that data (57 percent) now sits outside of the data center.
Data is the lifeblood of modern businesses but mobilizing it is far from easy. Companies have to go through a lot of steps just to make sure they are getting the most (if not all) out of the information coming in from different sources. Now, as the volume of this information grows multifold, Seattle-based Expanso is…
Expanso secures $7.5M for it’s open-source software Bacalhau, advancing edge data processing for enterprises, backed by General Catalyst & Hetz Ventures.
The Lab also welcomes its largest cohort to date with 17 multi-stage, global startups joining Batch #8 Fall Program September 13, 2023 08:00 AM Eastern Daylight Time BELLEVUE, Wash.–(BUSINESS WIRE)–5G Open Innovation Lab (5G OI Lab) announced today that international telecommunication leaders AT&T and Comcast have joined its innovation ecosystem. The Lab also announced today its…
Motherduck and Expanso announced a partnership that will unlock the future of data analytics. The partnership combines the strengths of Bacalhau, the open source project for efficient and secure distributed computation, with Motherduck, a serverless analytics solution powered by DuckDB.
Aronchick said his primary goal as Expanso CEO is to augment Bacalhau’s impact within the AI community, “to expedite the project’s development and make AI tools more accessible to a broader range of businesses.”
© Expanso Inc. All Rights Reserved 2023