Source: expanso_io
URL: https://expanso.io/privacy-policy

Effective Date: 16 June 2023
Welcome to Expanso Inc.
("Expanso," "we," "us," or "our").
We are committed to protecting your privacy and ensuring the security of your personal information. This Privacy Policy explains how we collect, use, disclose, and protect the information we collect when you visit our website and use our services. By accessing our website and providing your personal information, you agree to the terms and conditions of this Privacy Policy.
Information we collect.
PERSONAL INFORMATION
We collect information from you when you register on our site or participate in the forum by reading, writing, and evaluating the content shared here. When registering on our site, you may be asked to enter your name and email address. Your email address will be verified by an email containing a unique link. If that link is visited, we know that you control the email address.
USAGE INFORMATION
When registered and posting, we record the IP address that the post originated from. We also may retain server logs that include the IP address of every request to our server.
Use of collected information.
PERSONAL INFORMATION
We may use your personal information to:
- Personalize your experience on our website and respond to your individual needs.
- Improve our site offerings based on the information and feedback we receive from you.
- Enhance customer service by effectively responding to your requests and support needs.
- Send you information, notifications, or responses to inquiries or questions you may have.
USAGE INFORMATION
We may use usage information to:
- Understand and save your preferences for future visits.
- Compile aggregate data about site traffic and interaction to offer better site experiences and tools in the future.
- Contract with third-party service providers to assist us in understanding our site visitors.
Data retention policy.
We will make a good faith effort to:
- Retain server logs containing the IP address of all requests to this server for no more than 90 days.
- Retain the IP addresses associated with registered users and their posts for no more than 5 years.
Data security.
We implement a variety of security measures to maintain the safety of your personal information when you enter, submit, or access your personal information. However, no method of transmission over the internet or electronic storage is 100% secure, and we cannot guarantee its absolute security.
Use of cookies.
We use cookies to understand and save your preferences for future visits and compile aggregate data about site traffic and site interaction. These cookies enable the site to recognize your browser and, if you have a registered account, associate it with your registered account. We may contract with third-party service providers to assist us in better understanding our site visitors. These service providers are not permitted to use the information collected on our behalf except to help us conduct and improve our business.
Information disclosure.
We do not sell, trade, or otherwise transfer your personally identifiable information to outside parties unless required by law or for the operation of our website, conducting our business, or servicing you. We may release your information when we believe release is appropriate to comply with the law, enforce our site policies, or protect ours or others’ rights, property, or safety. Non-personally identifiable visitor information may be provided to other parties for marketing, advertising, or other uses.
Third party links.
Occasionally, at our discretion, we may include or offer third-party products or services on our site. These third-party sites have separate and independent privacy policies. We have no responsibility or liability for the content and activities of these linked sites. Nonetheless, we seek to protect the integrity of our site and welcome any feedback about these sites.
Children's Online Privacy Protection Act Compliance.
Our site, products, and services are directed to individuals who are at least 13 years old or older. If you are under the age of 13 and this server is in the USA, please do not use this site in compliance with the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA).
Online privacy policy only.
This online privacy policy applies only to information collected through our site and not to information collected offline.
Your consent.
By using our site, you consent to our website privacy policy.
Changes to our privacy policy.
If we decide to change our privacy policy, we will post those changes on this page.