Source: expanso_io
URL: https://expanso.io/features/#main

How it works.
-
MULTIPLE CLOUD MANAGEMENT PLATFORM
Expanso's container orchestration is built for speed and security across the whole range of your infrastructure. With Expanso, you can rapidly orchestrate your existing workloads, reducing downtime and improving overall efficiency. Our robust network makes it a reliable environment for all your applications, data and operations. -
PRIVATE NETWORK DEPLOYMENT
Expanso's container orchestration utilizes a peer-to-peer network, enabling distributed application deployments. By leveraging this network, your deployments ensure redundancy and fault tolerance. The distributed approach minimizes the risk of single points of failure, leading to a more reliable deployment with increased reliability. -
ON DEVICE COMPUTING
Expanso enables on-device computing, leading to significant cost savings. Running computations directly on edge devices can significantly reduce data transfer and cloud infrastructure expenses. Additionally, this reduces the instances where data leaves your premises, thus minimizing the number of regulatory events. -
PLUGGABLE EXECUTORS
Unlike many platforms that require packaging in ways that make sense for them, Bacalhau allows you to use any format you see fit. Whether or not it is industry standard containers or WASM packages, or your custom binaries, Bacalhau works the way you want it to, reducing the need to change the way you work. -
PERPETUAL JOBS
Our solution also offers perpetual jobs, which can run forever. This means a single solution can orchestrate both batch and long-running jobs, with a single control plane and API to monitor them.
Benefits.
Minimal infrastructure, Maximum protection
Expanso redefines the balance between security and infrastructure. Unlike traditional solutions that demand extensive hardware investments, our software requires minimal infrastructure investment, often working inside of existing devices and machines rather than requiring new deployments (read more about what measures are required by [ISO 27002](https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:27002:ed-3:v2:en)). This cost-effective approach guarantees robust data security without straining your resources. You also have the ability to oversee and manage when, how, and what data can be accessed, adding an extra layer of security to your information. With finely-tuned access controls, this extra layer of security shields your data from unauthorized access.
Multiple Cloud Management Platform
Expanso allows you to have all the flexibility of a global cloud platform, while still keeping your data on your premises. According to [Gartner](https://www.gartner.com/en/doc/375973-comparing-multicloud-management-and-governance-approaches) organizing multiple cloud management platforms are currently one of the biggest needs in the cloud market. Our approach lets you deploy workloads to where your data is created and stored, which means your data never leaves the secure confines of your environment. While ensuring that your sensitive information stays firmly under your control, Expanso allows you to have a true multiple cloud management platform.
Effortless Data Governance & Streamlined Data Management
Enforcing data governance has never been easier. Expanso’s architecture simplifies the process, allowing you to easily minimize and control data flows, without losing rich functionality. With Expanso, you can maintain a firm grip on your data, ensuring that it adheres to your governance policies every step of the way. Expanso also minimizes the need for data transfers which reduces the potential vulnerabilities associated with data movement.
Create a more robust business today
Ready to get started?
Ready to get started?
Potential use cases.
Learn more about how our software is used currently and get a sense on what you can do.