URL: https://nats.io/blog/page/2/

AboutDownloadDocumentationBlogCommunitySupportPrivacyNATS BlogWelcome to the NATS Blog! We have content from NATS Maintainers, end-users, and community contributors. We always appreciate outside contributions so if you would like to contribute a blog post, see ourContributor's Guidefor more information.NATS .NET Client v2 Alpha Released with Core NATS SupportZIYA SUZEN— July 13, 2023Starting in 2018 with .NET Core 2.1 , the .NET platform began to receive serious performance improvements in every major release. This excited many .NET developers, who have been enjoying faster and more efficient runtimes just by upgrading their project targets with every new .NET release. In 2021, .NET 6 became the first LTS release under Microsoft’s new .NET and .NET Core Support Policy .
The original NATS .NET client, called NATS.Read more...Release Candidate - NATS 1.0.0 Helm ChartCALEB LLOYD— July 5, 2023As the Kubernetes ecosystem continues to grow, installing NATS via Helm has become a very popular method.
The NATS 0.x series of the Helm Chart was initially released in 2020, a full year before JetStream was even available in the NATS Server.
The past 3 years have taught us that it is important to support all of the extensibility options possible in Kubernetes resources - custom Image Registries, ConfigMaps, TLS Secrets, Volumes and Mounts, Init Containers, and more.Read more...Building a Data-Driven Healthcare Demo with NATS.ioDAVID GEE— June 26, 2023We’re lucky to have partners and customers in healthcare and even luckier to have a team of highly skilled and talented software engineers. So when the challenge came along to build a meaningful demo for a Telehealth scenario, we couldn’t resist. No conversation on this topic would be complete without a sprinkle of AI or ML and so we posit that when used for good, these technologies can be applied to the preservation and quality of human life.Read more...NATS Server 2.9.18 ReleaseBYRON RUTH— June 14, 2023The NATS maintainers are happy to announce the 2.9.18 release ! We want to thank all of the people who contributed to this release through reporting issues and code contributions! If you are interested in contributing, please check out all the ways you can !
This release was a smaller one than the prior few, but there are still some key areas to cover, including:
Process purge replay properly on startup Daisy-chained leafnodes losing interest Optimize KV get for large key spaces and small messages Remediate potential panic scenarios For the entirety of the improvements and fixes, check out the release notes .Read more...Preview Release New JetStream Client APITOMASZ PIETREK— June 12, 2023Preview Release of the New JetStream Client API The NATS Maintainers at Synadia are excited to announce the preview release of the latest major improvement to the NATS client libraries - the new JetStream API. This is an important milestone to continue delivering developer-friendly, flexible, and comprehensive tooling for NATS. We’ve listened to your feedback and are confident this new API will simplify JetStream-related development and adoption.
The two-week preview period, starting June 12, 2023, is an opportunity for you to try the new API and provide feedback to refine and polish the client APIs.Read more...NATS Server 2.9.17 ReleaseBYRON RUTH— May 19, 2023The NATS maintainers are proud to announce the 2.9.17 release ! We want to thank all of the people who contributed to this release! If you are interested in contributing, please check out all the ways you can !
The key areas this post will cover include:
WebSocket transport truncation Health monitor improvements Leafnode fleet optimizations Monotonic time calculations For the entirety of the improvements and fixes, check out the release notes .Read more...MongoDB NATS ConnectorANDREA DAMIANI— May 16, 2023Data Synchronization Between Microservices With microservice architectures becoming the standard nowadays, it is a common need to extract data from your database to synchronize other downstream services.
Consider a social network where you have a service that stores new posts in a MongoDB collection. You may want to notify other services when a post is created, perhaps so that you can save it on Redis for fast retrieval, or add it to Elastic for full text search queries.Read more...Exploring NATS as a backend for k3sBYRON RUTH— May 9, 2023k3s is a lightweight Kubernetes distribution suitable for IoT and edge computing environments. One component k3s leverages is KINE , which is a shim enabling the replacement of etcd with alternate storage backends originally targeting relational databases.
In April 2022, the v0.9.0 release of KINE introduced native support for NATS as a backend. In June 2022, the k3s v1.23.7+k3s1 release included this KINE version making it possible for k3s deployments to connect to an existing NATS system.Read more...NATS Server 2.9.16 ReleaseBYRON RUTH— April 19, 2023The NATS maintainers are very proud to announce the 2.9.16 release ! 🥳
This release brings another round of stability and performance improvements, leveraging our new quality engineering practices described in the 2.9.15 announcement post , and iterating directly with users having high-scale and latency-sensitive workloads.
Given the positive feedback on the previous announcement post focusing on the higher-level impact of the changes, going forward all releases will have an announcement post!Read more...NATS Server 2.9.15 ReleaseBYRON RUTH— March 3, 2023Normally, the NATS maintainers do not publish a dedicated announcement for a patch release, but the 2.9.15 release of the NATS server has several significant stability and performance improvements worth highlighting, all driven by our new quality engineering process! 🥳
What does a patch release mean to NATS? And what are these new quality engineering processes?
Release management At the beginning of 2023, the NATS maintainers drafted an end-to-end “release management” document which includes the policies and procedures used for each NATS server release, everything from initial scoping to communication of the release itself.Read more...«««123…12»»»Copyright © NATS Authors 2024NATS is aCloud Native Computing Foundationincubating projectThe Linux Foundation has registered trademarks and uses trademarks.For a list of trademarks of The Linux Foundation, please seeTrademark Usage page.