URL: https://nats.io/blog/page/12/

AboutDownloadDocumentationBlogCommunitySupportPrivacyNATS BlogWelcome to the NATS Blog! We have content from NATS Maintainers, end-users, and community contributors. We always appreciate outside contributions so if you would like to contribute a blog post, see ourContributor's Guidefor more information.Performance Profiling of the NATS C ClientIVAN KOZLOVIC— January 14, 2016When I was tasked with writing a C client for NATS, I decided to use the excellent Go Client as the model. We were going to provide more Apcera supported clients, and for maintainability sake, it was better that all our clients' implementation follow the same model.
However, before getting the very first alpha release out, I was not happy with the performance results. I decided to use a tool to instrument the code and see where the bottlenecks were.Read more...NATS in Microsoft .NETCOLIN SULLIVAN— January 11, 2016Performance at scale is critically important for building distributed systems today. Microservices and IoT require applications to be distributed across a physical or virtual infrastructure, comprised of thousands, possibly millions of endpoints, many of which can be .NET services or applications. The end user needs these services to operate seamlessly, requiring extremely fast, lightweight, scalable, resilient, and always-on communication - NATS.
In developing the NATS C# .NET Client , the .Read more...NextGen Leads Auctions: Powered by NATSAARON JOHN SCHLOSSER— January 6, 2016NextGen Leads aims to provide extremely high quality health insurance leads and Medicare supplement leads by streamlining the lead buying experience from end to end. Our leads are generated internally by a team of lead generation experts; they are not brokered by any third party. They are then delivered in real time and never oversold, passing through various filters to ensure that our customers can place bids on only those leads that they want.Read more...NATS and Containers: Microservices at NATS SpeedBRIAN FLANNERY— December 11, 2015NATS is all about simplicity and speed. In that regard, NATS is extremely well suited for microservices architectures, acting as a transport between services. Many NATS users I speak to in my role as community manager are using NATS for this purpose due to it’s lightweight PubSub characteristics. As services become increasingly distributed and modularized, an always-on, fast, PubSub communication layer becomes very important. NATS allows many distributed services and applications to function in real-time as a single entity.Read more...Using NATS: Function, Callback, Request, ResponseBRIAN FLANNERY— November 11, 2015Bill Chute of Acadiant Limited has been using NATS for some time, and has given us some great feedback along the way. As Bill has stated in the past
“We considered a number of modern messaging platforms. NATS was the clear choice because it’s the highest-performance message broker we could find, and it solidly supports all the languages in our stack. Because of its clean design, it was easy for us to get up to speed with NATS and it gives us the scalability and responsiveness we need.Read more...Community Update at The London NATS User Group MeetupBRIAN FLANNERY— November 9, 2015The audience at the London Meetup was great! We had many local companies represented, and some of the leaders of other meetups such as Alexandre González Rodríguez (one of the organizers of the Go London ! Meetups), and Milos Gajdos (co-organizer of the Kubernetes London Meetups) present as well. I enjoyed meeting everyone, and getting your feedback after the talks.
My talk was focused primarily on:
What is NATS? Some meetup members were new to NATS, so in a nutshell, NATS boils down to simplicity and mind-blowing speed.Read more...NATS Lands in LondonBRIAN FLANNERY— November 7, 2015As the community and innovation around the NATS.io project has grown this year, we’ve had many requests for meetups, and have had some great content submitted to us by the community in support of these events.
The meetup held in San Francisco in August was fantastic, and we had a great series of talks there. Wally Quevedo, a core member of the NATS team, gave a must-watch talk on monitoring gnatsd servers .Read more...«««123…1112»»»Copyright © NATS Authors 2024NATS is aCloud Native Computing Foundationincubating projectThe Linux Foundation has registered trademarks and uses trademarks.For a list of trademarks of The Linux Foundation, please seeTrademark Usage page.